okay how are you guys good you have a
good week I'm good yeah so but it looks
like in a few of you I hope we haven't
lost anyone or maybe it's just the
subject is too easy for some people so
well we also have this wonderful
resources so for those watching online
welcome but do come to visit us sometime
alright so we are talking about
integrals right and I know that last
week we discussed double integrals and
triple integrals and four double
integrals you talked about integration
using polar coordinates and so this is
actually very it's a very useful tool
for integration that sometimes things
simplify when you use some interesting
stuff on now on the floor when you use a
different coordinate system we saw that
when we talked about as early as like a
second first or second week of the class
hello you guys are lacking in discipline
after you know not having me for a week
I hope not so you know remember that I'm
really hot you know strict but fair so
all right so already at the very
beginning we saw that many our solutions
simplify when we use polar coordinates
for example in describing curves on the
plane and you saw last week that
integration also simplified double
integrals simplify if you use polar
coordinates so now the next question is
what about triple integrals is there an
analogue of a polar coordinate system
for triple integrals and
how can we use such a coordinate system
to effectively evaluate triple integrals
and in fact because now we are in three
dimensions there is more than one choice
to make there are more options and there
are two particular coordinate systems
which are very convenient in three
dimensions which are called cylindrical
and spherical coordinate system so we
will discuss them in turn first we'll
talk about cylindrical cylindrical
coordinate system and cylindrical
coordinate system is really just an off
shot of the polar coordinate system in
two dimensions in a way we don't
introduce anything new in triple
integrals we use the same tool which
will ready use effectively in two
dimensions so the way it works is like
this the usual coordinate system XYZ is
replaced by another coordinate system
where on the XY plane you use polar
coordinates
on the XY plane and we just add the Z
variable the way we just added Z to X
and y so the result is that instead of
the XYZ coordinate system norton which
we normally use we pass through the
coordinate system which will have R
theta and Z so x and y i get get
replaced by r and theta in the same way
as for polar coordinates and z is just
thrown in as an extra variable so the
formula is expressing these coordinates
in terms of these new coordinates are
exactly the same as for Polar's they are
R cosine theta and R sine theta and then
we have this Z and so Z we have on both
sides and it's the same variable okay so
what are they what is this coordinate
system whose for this coordinate system
is good for describing objects which are
cylindrical well hence the name right so
what do I mean by cylindrical a cylinder
in general is something which comes from
an object on the XY plane by kind of
sweeping a surface by by using that
let's say a curve on XY plane so a
cylinder itself a cylinder itself is
like that we take we take a circle and
we if we if we just move it up and down
vertically we sweep a surface and that
surface is what we normally call a
cylinder cylinder all right so a circle
the equation of the circle on the plane
simplifies in polar coordinates R equals
R capital where this is a number and
this is the one of the variables one of
the coordinates in the polar coordinate
system and this number is just the
radius of the circle so in other words
it's a circle of radius radius R
so when we when we move it upside down
move it up and down like this along the
Z where this z axis we create the
surface in which the equation is the
same in 3d the same equation means that
we also have an arbitrary value of Z and
therefore we get this the cylinder and
the cylinder of radius R and so just
like in integrating on on the plane in
double integrals it is beneficial to use
polar coordinates and describing things
related to the circle or to the disk or
sectors in of the disk or annuli and
things like that it is beneficial to use
the cylindrical coordinate system for
triple integrals in describing things in
integrating things related to cylinders
and various things that you can obtain
by you from the cylinders okay so so
what does the triple integral look like
in cylindrical coordinates there is an
important point which we have to which
you should not forget which is that when
we pass to a new coordinate system there
is some advantage which is that some of
our not simplified but there is a sort
of a price to pay for which is that we
have to insert an additional factor in
the integral okay so for polar
coordinates coordinates something that
was discussed last week if you have an
integral of a function f da you can
write it as a double integral in polar
coordinate a f of r and theta but then
instead of simply putting the Rd theta
which you would normally put you insert
an additional factor which is R
so you get rdrd theta we instead of the
usual dxdy which we would have in a
polar coordinate in a normal coordinate
system what is the reason for this just
to go over it one more time because we
will now see how it works for
cylindrical and then for spherical
coordinates everything boils down to the
area of an elementary object with
respect to this coordinate system and
elementary object is is a rectangle
which you obtain by saying that X is say
in this case two coordinates x and y X
between some fixed value say X 0 and X 0
plus Delta X and Y is between some fixed
value and that value plus some increment
Delta Y for the XY coordinates for the
rectangular coordinate system this
inequalities describe a rectangle in
which one of the sides of Delta X and
the other side is Delta Y right and so
[Applause]
the area of this rectangle is simply
Delta x times Delta Y and this is what
gives us the expression for da at DX dy
and so it leads to a description of the
double integral as an iterated integral
in X and then Y or 1st in Y and then X Y
fubini's theorem but the key point is
the area of the elementary rectangle
which is given by this formula now when
we pass to polar coordinates the analog
of this elementary rectangle is the
following we have to look at all points
which are which which are given by these
inequalities say R between R 0 and R 0
press plus Delta R and theta in between
some fixed value of theta zero and theta
zero plus Delta Theta and the picture
will be different right because
because this gives us a sector of angle
Delta Theta and so and then the
condition for the four are to be between
R 0 and R 0 plus Delta R let's assume
that this is R 0 right just like I am
assuming that this is Theta 0 of course
in English in in this calculation
eventually you would like Delta R and
Delta Theta to become very small whereas
R 0 and theta 0 are fixed right but I'm
just drawing this picture I kind of
magnify everything so it looks like
Delta Theta looks like sort of the same
magnitude as theta 0 but in fact it
should be much more and so then if this
is Delta R this and this is confined
within Delta Theta and the elementary
object instead of this one we get a kind
of it sort of looks like a rectangle but
not exactly because first of all there
is a certain angle here and these are
not straight lines but these are these
are segments of a circle right so what's
the area of this the area of this one
actually we cannot I mean it will be we
can but it will be different it's not so
it's simple to calculate give exact
answer but because we are going to take
the limit anyway eventually we only need
that sort of a good approximation to
this and what's a good approximation to
this we can think of this we can think
that when Delta R and Delta Theta are
very small this will look like a
rectangle with the size Delta R and
what's the other side well this actually
has length R 0 times Delta Theta right
the segment of a circle of radius R 0
confined within the angle Delta Theta is
given by this formula R 0 times Delta
Theta and so we approximate this
by the area of the rectangle with the
size Delta R and R 0 times Delta Theta
and the result of this is just the
product of this and we get R 0 Delta
Theta Delta R and so that's where that
they are that's the R which shows up in
the in the formula for the integral here
I denoted by R 0 because because I
wanted to emphasize that in for
calculating this particular area I fix R
0 I fix this length but when we do a
general calculation this will just
become R and Delta Theta will get
replaced by D theta Delta R by D R in
the limit right and so that's how we end
up with this formula so this is the most
this is the only sort of non-trivial
thing to remember about polar
coordinates don't forget to put this
factor R which actually could be a good
thing I made it sound like a surprise to
pay that we are being taxed for sort of
for the convenience of using these
coordinates but actually sometimes and
often times this could be a good thing
and the typical example is let's say you
have an integral like this something
like 1 minus x squared minus y squared
DX dy so you see this is complicated
right this is actually something we
discussed it's kind of similar to
something we discussed earlier this is
this will be very difficult to take just
as an integral in x and y but when you
pass two polar coordinates this will
become square I'm not writing the limits
but I'm just giving a rough sketch here
this becomes 1 minus R squared right and
now we get this extra factor R and then
we get the Rd theta
and so you see this actually becomes a
much better integral because I couldn't
reduce a new variable let's say T which
is R squared and if I do that then DT
becomes 2 times RDR and and then this
actually gives me one-half of DT and
this becomes this becomes a square root
of 1 minus T instead of 1 minus R
squared and this is much easier to
calculate rate because the
antiderivative of this is just a 1 minus
T to the power 3 cos times 2/3 minus 2/3
whereas for this one it's much more
complicated well and it's imagine if it
were it was like exponential function or
something so so then it becomes even
worse right
so sometimes actually having this
factors if it actually works to our
advantage but in any case you have to
remember to insert it to get to get the
right answer now so this was all about
the polar coordinates but cylindrical
are not that far away far apart because
for cylindrical the only thing that
changes is that we now throw in an extra
variable namely variable V so we add the
variable T and now instead of the double
integral we have a triple integral over
some solid some region in a
three-dimensional space and so we have
some FG a where this da usually info in
normal in a Cartesian coordinate system
we simply write as DX dy DZ right but
now if we want to use polar coordinate
system we'll have to write this function
as a function of R theta and Z and then
we'll have to write dr g theta DZ and
the question is what should we put in
front that has to be some factor and
that factor is the fact responsible for
the area of the elementary domain like
this in the usual coordinate system in
the 3-dimensional space in the case when
I say usually mean Cartesian coordinate
system the elementary object is a box
of sides Delta X Delta Y and Delta Z
right so it's actually no one correct me
what is it what what is it a mistake
here DV that's right see I'm a little
rusty after the break but Luke will do
correct me when I do when I make this
mistake so DV because we emphasize that
this is the elementary volume it's
volume it's not area anymore
the a of course was for for area and V
is for volume so the elementary volume
opposite for this guy is just just Delta
X Delta Y Delta Z which gives a gives
rise to DX dy DZ in the integral and
allows us to calculate this integral as
an iterated integral first x and y and z
or any other any other order that you
choose but now we choose this coordinate
system and so we have to be careful but
we have to now look at the elementary
object in this coordinate system and
what is this elementary object well we
just define it in the same way as before
by simply I shouldn't have done it this
way I'm actually jumping ahead let's
just do it like this
it really should be cylindrical so it
should be it should be like this right
so it is it is complete in a way it's a
kind of it's what you get by combining
the two things in this see in this this
place this side of the of this bit of
this object looks like looks like this
it's yes why is it called cylindrical
because this is a cylinder right okay he
saved you by the way because I was kind
of approaching to count how many seconds
it will take for you to notice me but he
saved you so you should take him so the
cyllage cylindrical is called because
you you see the you make a change on the
XY plane and then you just throw in the
Z variable in other words that you
change the coordinates just on the XY
plane and then you kind of let the the
third variable the same as before so
it's the same idea if the idea for say
taking the circle and kind of just
moving it up and down to get this object
know the circle is fixed right it
doesn't grow it doesn't the the the
radius of the circle is fixed it's this
R capital right
just think of a ring which is made of
metal or something you just move it up
and down vertically along the parallel
to the z axis right so what's the result
you sweep a surface which is the surface
of the cylinder right
you can only use footage no you don't
use it's only four cylinders but well
what's in a name you know it's it's a
it's a name so it is it is derived from
this right but it's not supposed to
explain everything we can do with this
coordinate system right any other
questions
all right so what what's the elementary
volume of this well we already know the
approximate area of this that's RDR our
Delta R Delta Theta and we know that
this is Delta G right and so the volume
is RDR Delta R Delta R Delta Theta Delta
Z so it's the same R which we had or
maybe if you want R 0 if you want this
to be R 0 the same R which we had in the
calculation of the polar coordinates so
the bottom line is this factor is
exactly the same as in the polar
coordinate system it's not no not more
not more complicated ok so that's the
formula going to use and now let's do an
example let's do an example
[Applause]
so evaluate triple integral over e of
the function e to the Z where e is
enclosed by the parabola with Z equals 1
plus x squared plus y squared the
cylinder the cylinder x squared plus y
squared equals 5 and the xy-plane
okay so actually let me get let me draw
a bigger
so the paraboloid looks what is the
probability look like it it starts at
the point 1 on the z axis and it so it
opens up like this right and the
cylinder is okay I just erased it
so that's assuming that let's assume
that this is radius this is going to be
radius square root of 5 right because we
have 5 with the square of the radius as
always so the radius itself is square
root of 5 and so that that's a circle at
the base of the cylinder and we want the
figure which is a solid which is
confined by by this by the paraboloid by
the cylinder and by the xy-plane
so it is the the inside of this so it's
kind of concave the surface kind of
concave it goes inside right like like a
fancy fancy glass so what we need to do
is to calculate the integral over this
this is our region e of the function e
to the Z so when we do triple integrals
you have to so then you have to write it
as an iterated integral okay so you have
to choose in which order you're going to
integrate so so you you're going to end
up with an integral so you have e to the
Z here actually these one of the
variables so we just write it like this
if this is good right because he's one
of the variables in this news in
cylindrical system and then you're going
to have it are let me emphasize this R
again that's the same are back before
and then we have rdrd theta and DZ so
that now we want to write it as an
iterated integral so you have to choose
in which order to integrate okay
so what's the what's the best way to do
it for this excellent for the
cylindrical coordinate system is always
you see the point is that you have to
choose what the base of this actually
this is a general general approach to
when you have to choose the order you
have to see whether what's a good
projection of your object is there a
good projection on to say XY plane or Y
Z plane or ZX plane that's the first
question and once you have a good
projection everything projection to
something nicely right so in this
particular case it sort of does project
nicely onto the XY plane it projects
just onto onto the disk onto V which is
our less than or equal to square root of
5 the disc of radius square root of 5
right so that's this that is yellow
let's let's draw it with yellow and then
for each point in this disk we have to
we'll have to integrate so first of all
we'll have to integrate over the disk
and this will be the this is I'm talk
about the outer integration I'm starting
from outside when you project onto this
you are choosing the first two variables
which normally if you were if we were
using x and y and z-coordinates
that would be integrating first x and y
its then you decide you decide between x
and y later but first we choose the
first two and then you then you choose
which one goes first right so that's the
strategy which I proposed that you're
going to end up with three different
integrations right so the last one will
be the integration over the remaining
variable with respect to its projection
so here I project onto the XY plane so
this will be D Z but let's let's now see
what happened here so this is going to
be
the usual coordinate system and the
Cartesian coordinate system this would
have been just DX dy which we wouldn't
have to decide the f dy or dy DX and
once you decide then then in the in the
last integration you have the freedom to
choose what what x and y are so that
means that you have a point here X Y
inside and then you the limits will be
the limit you have to sort of draw the
segment starting from the bottom of this
of this object to the top of this object
which indicates from the disk which is
part of the XY plane to this paraboloid
and you would have to integrate in the
last integration you would have to
integrate from the bottom value to the
top value which in this particular case
what does it mean the Z goes from 0
right
two to this value but what is this value
this value is going to be one plus this
is going to be the value of Z on the
paraboloid so that is in the Cartesian
coordinate system this would have been 1
plus x squared plus y squared but now
we're replacing this with R squared so
because we are doing the integral in the
in the polar coordinate system we will
actually write it as 1 plus R squared
where it is understood that R squared
comprises x squared and y the sum of x
squared + y squared yes
that's right well up and down the cause
I have chosen the projection on to the
XY plane right so the the way I suggest
to do to the integral is the following
that first let's choose the two outer
integrations the person the second right
so geometrically it means that you are
projecting your three-dimensional region
three dimensional solid onto one of the
planes one of the coordinate planes I'm
talking now about the really the
Cartesian coordinate system but
cylindrical core this is not that far
away from the Cartesian so the same
analysis sort of applies here so so the
projection here is going to be the disc
right but in general it could be square
it could be something else
so that will be taken care of by these
two integrations by the limit here
that's right the projection goes in
those two and the inner integral is the
remaining variable which in this case is
Z so to put the limit here you have to
take one of the points in the projection
in the image of the projection which is
this point say X Y which actually
because we are doing polar coordinates
or cylindrical coordinates this would
have to be recorded as R theta right so
this point would be R Theta and we'll
have to take the segment along the third
variable which is the variable going
from the bottom to the top from the sort
of the bottom lid to the top lid of this
of this figure of this region which as I
explained the bottom is on the XY plane
so the G is equal to zero at the bottom
and at the top it's what it's we have to
look at the equation of the parabola
it's 1 plus x squared plus y squared
which because we are working with
cylindrical coordinates will be written
as 1 plus R squared okay let me finish
the integral and you ask me if you have
more questions so so then what what
remains to be done
what remains to be done is that we have
to put also here R and theta so I have
to choose some order in which we will do
R and theta so let's say we put here
they are and put here D theta
because now we are actually see once we
are here in this to out outer into
integrals we are actually doing a double
integral we are deciding how to how to
split the double integral into iterated
integral so and what we are working with
is already the image of this
three-dimensional object onto the XY
plane which is nothing but the disc
right so for the disc we know what the
limits are first so we know that it
doesn't matter in which order to take RN
theta and second of all we know that R
goes from zero to the radius which is in
this case square root of 5 and theta
goes from zero to two pi right that's
because the disc this disc is described
by well actually I don't even have to
write one more time
I just have to add here theta from 0 to
2pi and finally we should we should not
forget to put the function which is e to
the Z and we should not forget to put
this factor R so I'm I'm introducing a
slightly different notation from before
right normally we would write this as e
to the Z times R times dr d-theta and
then we put sort of brackets and we
think about integrating first with
respect to R and then there's respect of
theta and sorry dividing this respect to
Z then this respect to theta and this
respect to R but I'm writing it in this
way which i think is a little bit more
suggestive that you write the deal the
gr the G theta DZ the D of the variable
you're integrating
right next to the integral so you
remember which one it is you see because
in the old way you would have to put the
are the last one right so the last one
will get paired with the LA the first
thing to grow the next-to-last will get
shared with the second integral and so
on this way it's a little bit more
intuitive so I prefer to write it this
way but you can choose whichever way you
like but I hope that it's clear what I
mean
well this certain is not clear because
it says on 2 and then it says 0 so let
me write it here and arrive on 2
like this I think now it should be clear
okay
any questions about this no yes that's
right so in fact I could have put our
all the way all the way here right oh
yeah yeah yeah yeah you're right you're
right you're right you're right right so
I actually I actually did it in a wrong
way in the wrong order
so this so did I do it in the wrong
order now hold on no the older of course
matters because see the point is that no
no I did it correctly who thinks that I
did correctly who thinks that I didn't
do it correctly okay you guys who failed
of course now we are here to find the
truth you know so I but see here's
here's the way I thought about it this
afternoon actually and I convinced
myself this is right but here's the
point the point is
right so the point is that we are let me
this is actually very kind it could be
very confusing so let's actually do it
slowly you should not worry so much
about the fact that here there is a
dependence on R in the inner integral
what you should worry about is the fact
that there is a dependence on R in the
limit so you certainly don't want to put
this outside you see because you want to
end up with the number okay in other
words we can disagree on many things but
there is one thing we should certainly
agree with which is that the integral is
a number okay it should not depend on R
it should not depend on theta it should
not depend on anything it's a number you
cannot possibly get a number if the last
integration has the limit which depends
on a variable okay so it's not going to
work
but more conceptually the way I'd like
to think about this is as follows and I
would like to think maybe in slightly
you know it could be some work more
complicate domain so what I'm doing is
I'm projecting so there is some E and
let's say I want to project it onto the
XY plane that's right now let's talk
about just the Cartesian coordinate
system let's not worry for now about
cylindrical and spherical even in the
Cartesian coordinate system
the way I would like to think about
integration is as follows that I have a
region on a three dimensional space
right and what I do is I project it on
to the XY variable so now if I have a
triple integral over e when I have half
GV first of all I split it like this
it's going to be a double integral over
D over this D all the single integral
with respect to the remains of the
remaining variable easy you see where
for each for each X&Y
in D
for each x and y in Indi you will have
some lower limit let's say it L of X Y
and you'll have some upper limit U of X
Y right so that's what's going to look
like yes
so then I would just write like oh and
here yeah that's right so then here I
would put da like this yes that's right
in the all the way right so you want me
to write this an old way okay so this in
the old way would be zero to square root
of 5 0 to 2pi 0 to 1 plus R squared
right e to the Z D D D theta dr oh I'm
sorry RDR yes very good thank you see
because it's red so I don't I don't
agency are you are well usually with the
right are the argot yeah are gr okay
fine whatever we can put our inside here
maybe it's better to kind of keep track
okay so then normally we would put
brackets like this is that okay this
make sense so what I'm doing is just I'm
trying to avoid using the bracket and
instead just putting the differentials
right next to the integral so it becomes
a little bit more clear to me anyway
but you are free to use whichever way
you like so you know so this is sort of
a new way to write and all the way to
write would be
fgz well it's all with the same da over
G so but the the main point which I
would like to make is that the first to
integrate integrations in the formula C
it's very confusing because when I say
the first integration although I mean
the first integral although I mean the
action the creation you perform its
oppinion right the first integral you
write is the last one it's the last
thing to go your ID is the first you
calculate okay that's right that's right
so this is the outer the outer goes for
the outer is written first so that's why
it goes those last you see so you have
to figure this out on your own I guess
some point you have to think about it
and have a clearer picture because
because like I said it's very confusing
what do you call first would equal
second who is on first right so the the
last integration the last integration is
outer one and the last integration
corresponds to the projection of your
three-dimensional region onto the plane
okay that's the point all right
so having established that let's let's
evaluate finally this integral so what
do we get
[Applause]
we get zero squared 5 to 5 and then here
we get R times e to the 1 plus R squared
minus 1 right and you get dr this
integration just gives you 2 pi because
the the integrand does not depend on
theta so you just get 2 pi times our e
to the 1 plus r squared minus 1 right
and finally you integrate over R and so
so here you want to you want to use you
want to change variables so just I just
write the answer so you get 2 pi is an
overall factor and then you get 1/2 e to
the 1 plus R squared minus 1/2 R squared
between 0 and square root of 5 right and
so the answer is 2 pi times e to the 6
minus e minus 5
one half but because one half and to get
cancelled so you get e to the 6 minus e
and this guy gives you 5 right so that's
correct
ok yes it's pi that's right so it like
this
Thanks ok cool so we're good with this
yes it is universally accepted that
are you talking about this formula or
this form this you mean this integral
yes but I I'm not sure I understand what
the question is which line first of all
this one is it this one yes here a
little bit the left-hand side or the
right-hand side sorry the question is is
it okay to put the R before the function
of R okay the answer is yes it is okay I
am suggesting with notation in the book
it's not used right but it is the
pricing mathematician I can assure you
that a lot of people use that you know
it's it's certain interchangeable they
do commute in other words it doesn't
matter which order you write them it's a
it's a more interesting point whether
these guys commute you know whether it's
whether it is important how you write
the Rd fate or g theta dr this is a much
more subtle point which i'm going to
going to get into too much but certainly
dr come you can put on the left or on
the right of the function of r so that's
not no worries here okay
let's move on so the next one is called
spherical coordinates and it's a little
bit more interesting sorry spiracle
coordinates and of course the question
is right away why are they called the
spherical coordinate because they should
remind you of a sphere okay I do as you
will see so let me actually keep this
let me keep this picture so spherical
coordinates work in the following way
suppose you want to invent a coordinate
system in which the sphere it is a
sphere which gets the simplest possible
equation you see so in the in the
cylindrical coordinate system it is a
circle that gets to say in a polar
coordinate system it is a circle which
gets the simplest equation R equals a
constant that's a circle over a of a
given radius in the cylindrical
coordinate system the simplest equation
is the equation for the cylinder okay R
equals R is a circle in choler
coordinates because R is a cylinder in
the cylindrical coordinate system so
cylindrical conceding to G and now I
want to have some variable row such that
this equation will give me a sphere and
that's called a spherical coordinate
system and that's some 3d so that means
that this row should really be the
distance from the origin of my
coordinate system to my point because
the skier was here with the center at
the origin the sphere with the center at
the origin of radius R capital this one
is going to be the set of all points
such that the distance from the origin
to my point is given by this by this
number R let's say it's square root of 5
I can a previous example okay so know
that this is not the same as R in the
cylindrical coordinate system because R
in the cylindrical coordinate system is
not the distance from the origin to this
but rather it's a distance
from the origin to the projection of my
point onto the XY plane so that's not
the same thing right so you see right
away that this is not the same
coordinate system and sure enough this
simplest equation Rho equals a constant
describe is not a cylinder but a sphere
okay but now so now I got the first
variable of my spherical coordinate
system but that's not enough I need
three variables right because I'm a
three dimensional space so I need to
complete this row by two additional
variables two additional degrees of
freedom if you will so that I could give
each point a unique address by using
those three coordinates what are they so
the standard conveys a different way
it's actually to do it by the standard
convention which we are using in this
class and this book is the following
that we we measure two angles in
addition to rule we measure two angles
and the first angle is exactly the same
as before
theta it's the state of the cylindrical
or polar coordinate system okay and so
we need one more and we find this one
more
by measuring the this angle and the code
is Phi so the spherical coordinate three
coordinates are all Phi and theta where
only one of them is part of the of a
cylindrical coordinate system which data
is part of the cylindrical coordinate
system but the others are you okay so by
the way the notationally phi sometimes
is also is written like this it's the
same thing so I find it easier to write
Phi like this but when you type for
example and then in the book it's
written like this so you can use
whichever notation you like so Rho Phi
and theta the first step of course is to
express the user coordinates the
Cartesian coordinates in terms of Rho
Phi and theta and to see that indeed
these coordinates are determined the
points
on in space and also to see what the
ranges are so what is the formula well
what we can do is we can use the old
formula which is R cosine theta and then
note that R is equal to Rho times which
this is equal to Rho times the sine of
this angle see the point is that this
has the right angle this is a triangle
this is a triangle which has a right
angle and this is Phi so you can find
this distance which is our of the
cylindrical coordinate system by taking
R or multiplying by the sine of this
angle so this is a Rho times sine of Phi
and now I substitute this in here and I
get Rho sine Phi cosine theta
yes which access is five measured from
this method from Z right so I did not
put labels but I should yes XYZ in
standard Y another question
Rho is not it does not belong to any
plane a priori it's in space somewhere
right it's just I have a point it kind
of flows around it like this right
Wiggles around it's not it doesn't
belong to any particular plane it's free
to move right because our point is free
to move in through space and so the
segment connecting our point to the
origin it does not necessarily belong to
any plane which one this triangle it has
the right angle here because this is the
projection I don't know if it looks like
a project it looks a little bit it's a
little bit crooked I guess it should be
more fair it should be a little bit more
parallel to the Jeep's line than what I
made it look like
better slightly okay
so this is the perpendicular which we
draw up from this point where our point
this is our point we drop it on to the
XY plane so I guess the rest this should
be clear any other questions
yes that's right if they'd always taken
from the x axis for the projection
everything is a little bit not straight
on this picture so this is our this is
the old R which is not this this R is
not part of this vertical coordinate
system it's part of the cylindrical
coordinate system the reason I have
drawn it I've written it here or put
this label is to connect to make a
connection between the spherical and
cylindrical coordinates and also to
simplify the derivation of the formula
for XY & z because you I do it in two
steps I first recall the formula for the
cylindrical coordinates which is really
the same as for polar coordinates and
then I just substitute R equals Rho sine
Phi and then I do the same for the walk
or the Y variable and then Z is what is
D to find thee we have to complete this
to the rectangle I'm sorry it should be
a sine theta that's right thank you
all right and to find these I have to
use another right triangle which is this
one yes again I didn't do it very well
maybe more like this okay so this is a
right triangle this is Phi so Z is Rho
times cosine Phi so if you visualize if
you visualize this picture you see that
you don't have to memorize or write on
your cheat sheet the formulas for the
strip of course very easy
you have to remember the polar
coordinates of course but I mean you
don't remember polar coordinates then
it's like remembering your phone number
in some sense and I think so if you
remember polar coordinates then then the
spherical coordinates are very easy just
by using by memorizing this picture
visual or visualized in this picture
okay what are the ranges so are always
like R Rho is a non-negative number
although for R if you remember we had
certain convention in polar coordinates
which sometimes allowed our to be
negative but in polar instead of a
coordinate systems system that would be
make things too complicated so we don't
do that so so Rho is non negative theta
is just like in a polar coordinate
system or in the cylindrical it's
between zero and two pi
and what about Phi what are the ranges
for Phi zero and pi exactly because you
can go so if this is the vertical this
is a vertical on the z axis you can go
all the way down to PI but if you go
more than PI then you can sort of
approach it from a different direction
and it will be less from that direction
with less than pi so that's what we do
so it's going to be from zero to five
you see what I mean yes that's right
from the vertical so in other words what
I'm saying is
let's say so this is the axis and this
is the origin so you have a let's
suppose that our point actually lives on
the on the Y heap on the Y Z plane so
and let's let's start rotating it so
this is quite for this point this is Phi
for this point this is five for this
point still less than pi right so we get
here it's still I mean I'm trying to say
is this this is this right we measure
angle from here but finally when we go
like this
we should not measure it like this but
you should measure it this way you see
them in so this is wrong and this is
right which is fine so you choose
whichever is shorter which is smaller
and that's going to always be between 0
and pi so pi would be this this is pi
which is an point on the negative Phi
equals PI response to point on the
negative part of the G axis did you have
a question all right now what are what
are these coordinates good for well the
first answer is has already been given
in this coordinate system it's much
easier to describe the sphere so the
sphere is now given by the equation Rho
equals R instead of instead of x squared
plus y squared plus Z squared equals R
squared of the rest of the Cartesian
coordinate system or R squared plus V
squared equals R square
r-squared of the cylindrical coordinates
it's just a simple as possible equation
Rho equals a constant so that's in a way
justification for the use English
coordinate system and for the name but
that's not the only object which has a
nice representation in in this
coordinate system we can also represent
night and a cone by the equation Phi
equals some fixed angle Phi 0 so that's
the cone right let's let's look at this
picture again so let's suppose I fix I
fix some Phi i65 and I look at all all
the points which have a given angle like
this Phi 0 6 to the z-axis so then it's
like this is the z-axis and my point is
like this I don't know I don't have
enough visual aids so I'm I have to
trust your imagination and your
intuition may be like this is better I
don't know so the point is that this is
the angle so the angle is fixed so it
has to be the same angle between your
points and in the same z-axis so the
result is the cone and because I don't
specify what role is I don't specify the
distance it could it can go as far away
as I want so it's an infinite cone kind
of upper cone going in a to infinity
right so it's not bounded unbounded cone
so don't think that I just drew one
level curve for it but it goes to
infinity so the cone is given by this
formula which is again much simpler than
v equals square root of x squared plus y
squared of the cartesian coordinate
system or Z equals R of the cylindrical
coordinate center which is not so bad
but this is little better this is
to handle so this are the things you
should remember the cone and the sphere
have a very nice expression in terms of
in terms of this coordinate system now
what about the integration what about
integration in circle coordinates in
spherical coordinate system so once
again we have to figure out what is the
volume of the elementary object with
respect to the spherical coordinate
system
so these are the elementary object for
the Cartesian and the cylindrical
coordinate systems which give us the
usual form of DF dy DV and r vr D theta
DT so now we have to do exactly the same
for for the spherical coordinate system
so what is the elementary object now and
again by elementary object I mean simply
that you impose the condition that Rho
is between some Rho 0 and Rho 0 class
Delta Rho and what was my secretary
about Phi Phi is between Phi 0 and Phi 0
plus Delta Phi and theta is between some
theta 0 and theta zero plus Delta so
let's draw this object which corresponds
to this inequalities
like this
tygris Thank You Vince
well this whole thing should be kind of
noted line okay and like this and like
this
okay you see if you I mean this well in
fact this I can do good like this so
maybe it's better so here what happens
here first of all this is Delta Theta
Delta Phi right this is my this is Rho
zero so this thing is actually between
two spheres convention two spheres which
are very close radii very similar idea
so this is something which is between
those spheres and it's first of all we
cut it by saying that the angle goes
between you know it can find within
Delta Phi and also when we project this
down onto the XY plane and we project it
down onto the XY plane various angle I'm
not going to draw it all the way for the
projection going to be Delta Theta so
this is the projection onto
XY plane you see so now I have to
evaluate the volume of this just like I
have to evaluate the volume of this and
in this in my other coordinate systems
so what is it like what is this volume
equal to well we don't calculate exactly
we approximate it and we approximated by
the volume of the cube so it not the
cube but a box a box whose sides are
given by the lengths of this this kind
of circular segments that are going to
be all circular segment okay so the this
one is very easy to find well first of
all this one is very easy to find this
is just Delta Delta Rho this is judge
cultura that's one side okay now this
one this one is also easy to find this
is easy this is Rho 0 and the angle here
is Delta Phi so this is Rho times Delta
Phi it's similar to the way we found
that to be R 0 x times Delta Delta Theta
so it remains to find the this one which
I guess you cannot see this color
actually is better than the other ones
kind of greenish can you see this one
yeah oh good ok so this one is a tricky
one because you would be tempted to take
Rho 0 times Delta Theta and this is not
correct so this is this is only one
there is only one set of points here the
point is that this is the same as this
in other words this actually is not this
is not part of a circle of radius Rho
zero and confined within the angle Delta
Theta on the contrary it is actually
part of a circle on the on the ply on
the XY plane but the radius is not the
radius of that circle is if this which
is not rosy ro but it is it is r it is
Rho zero times sine Phi so that's the
only point that you have to realize to
get the right answer and so and then
you've got you've got Delta Theta I'm
trying to draw this like this this is a
project this is on the XY plane and so
this segment is actually each length is
Rho 0 times sine Phi Delta Theta ok so
the answer is for the volume it's
approximated by Rho 0 sine Phi Delta
Theta times Delta Rho times Delta times
Rho 0 again this is 0 0 3 and times
Delta Phi
yes
I'm I am I'm trying to calculate the
volume of this right and I am
approximating it by the volume of a box
like this which has the falling sides
this side is Rho 0 sine Phi Delta Theta
that's this times Delta Rho which is
this side times Rho 0 times Delta Phi is
the yellow side so the end result is Rho
0 squared sine Phi times Delta Rho Delta
Phi Delta Theta ok so the the the upside
of this is that when you compute a
triple integral in spherical coordinates
you have to introduce the fact that all
squared times sine Phi it's a little bit
more complicated than for than for
cylindrical polar coordinates the triple
integral over some solid is Theta Rho
times Rho squared sine Phi well since I
wrote it in red before let me write in
red again a Rho squared sine Phi that's
the factor to remember V Rho D Phi D
theta ok 1 so we do this calculation
once and for all then we just memorize
it Rho squared times sine Phi and and
now after that we can do this triple
integrals by using iterated integrals
for these three variables Rho Phi and
theta let's see how it works in practice
so here's an example compute the
integral of x squared plus y squared
plus Z squared DV where e the region is
bounded by the XZ plane and the spheres
x squared plus y squared plus Z squared
equals 9 and x squared plus y squared
plus Z squared equals 16 so between two
spheres and also the XZ plane so first
of all I have to say the general comment
on OpenType say only one next thing next
week will help me turn on the midterm I
will not tell you which coordinate
system to use right that you have to
decide yourself so the question is you
have to look for clues which coordinate
system spherical cylindrical you have to
remember one thing that this expression
x squared plus y squared plus Z squared
simplifies in the spherical coordinate
system so if you see x squared plus y
squared plus Z squared how many times 1
2 3 times
chances are it's best to use in this
case the spherical coordinate system if
you die mean because this is Rho squared
right
this is Rho squared if you see x squared
plus y squared that's R squared R being
the R of the polar or cylindrical
coordinates that's how you know that you
probably should do use polar coordinates
or cylindrical coordinate depending
whether you use dual are doing a
two-dimensional double integral or
three-dimensional triple integrals but
in this case it's it's very here
you'd be better off using spherical
coordinates now we convince you like an
try to visualize this we could try to
visualize this think of us here first of
all let me draw let me just draw just a
quarter on this picture actually yeah
about a quarter so that's that's the
part of the sphere this is a sphere of
radius three because nine is three
squared right and this is fear of radius
4 because 16 is 4 squared so let's say
this is a this is a sphere of radius 3
and then this is the inner sphere and
then there is an outer sphere which has
radius 4 so see this one is inside the
other and what you're looking for is
what you want to look at is the
3-dimensional shell which is in between
the two in between these two spheres
it's like an analyst by 3 dimensional
analysis between two circles and this is
between two spheres and also you have to
bind a better bound is is the XZ plane
so this is the XZ plane so actually
that's not the whole thing the whole
this is 1/4 of the whole thing because
you will also have something in the in
this quadrant and in those two quadrants
which are behind the zy plane so this is
1/4 so to speak of the picture if I try
to draw the whole picture it will be
more confusing so you just have to draw
the same thing but three more times and
that's what you need to cut it now
actually here the way it's phrased it
sounds almost as though it is not it is
ambiguously defined because it doesn't
say in which side of the XD play it
could be on this I draw it on this side
where Y is positive
but it doesn't say that so in principle
I could also look at the other half but
the point is that the answer does not
depend on which path you choose because
the function which you use the function
that you use it does not change if you
if you flip Y if you replace Y by
negative Y so if that were not the case
the problem would not be well-defined
would not have been well-defined but
actually this is well-defined because
the answer is the same no matter no
matter on which side of the XZ plane you
look okay now to compute this you write
C this is one case this is one a
coordinate system where you cannot so
easily visualize the way I explained in
a previous discussion for cylindrical
and and Cartesian coordinates where I
was talking about projection because
these coordinates do not involve any of
the variables of the Cartesian
coordinate system does not involve X
different one of Y does not involve Z so
you have to be a little bit user
imagination and you have to just try to
describe this by inequalities in the
coordinate of the spherical coordinate
system so the inequalities will be in
this case as Rho is between 3 & 4 we
know this right then what about what
about what about 5 well 5 actually can
be anything from 0 to PI it takes the
maximum range and then you have to here
the condition is on theta if there was
no condition about the XD plane if we
didn't say that if the problem didn't
say that one of the bounds was the ZX
plane we would write that theta is
between 0 & 2 pi which is the maximum
possible value right this is a total
range of theta but because we are
bounded by XZ plane that means that
theta can go from 0 to only up to here
but it cannot go further because we are
on this side you see I mean
that means that state actually goes from
zero to PI and that's what that's what
this extra bar about gives you right so
these are the ranges and so actually in
the spherical coordinate system this
very complicated very complicated domain
looks very simple right it looks a like
a box it looks like a box and so the
integral that you get describing this is
triple integral is actually going to be
the simplest possible triple integral
with respect to this coordinate system
and you can choose any order you like
for for the integration because the
bounds do not depend on other variables
you see they are fixed so if it's like
the basic integral yes very good
question is it is it going to be like
this for in all coordinates in all for
all problems for spherical coordinates
or just for this one just for this one
of course because you can imagine more
complicate domains in which the bounds
will depend on other variables right so
I'm just getting the simplest possible
example okay so so here you're going to
have say row from 3 to 4 and then 5 from
0 to PI and theta from 0 to 5 and then
you don't forget your function which is
Rho squared and don't forget the extra
factor which is Rho squared this one Rho
squared sine Phi so times Rho squared
sine Phi D theta D Phi 0
Rho squared sine Phi huh sorry why is it
Rho square times Rho squared
it's called Rho Rho so that's actually a
good question on the midterm would be
what is this variable called and so if
you write for pt4 there for the
explained that you get to that point
deducted this is a roll right anyway so
this Rho squared comes from the
integrand which is x squared plus y
squared by d squared which is Rho
squared and this Rho squared comes from
the extra factor so the net effect is
that you got rows row to the force sine
Phi so that you get a very simple
manageable integral okay I'm sorry
hold on hold on this one one minute left
yes letting it roll squared sine Rho
squared sine Phi is always there and
then you have the function okay
so we'll continue on Thursday